It's our pleasure to be talking with Sanford Berger in Carmel, California.
It's for the benefit of my title.
Right.
And you were telling my wife about the chair that you're sitting in there.
Yeah, well, actually, he was primarily an architectural worker.
We're talking about your father.
My father.
Things to be built into building.
And rarely did he do furniture or free-standing sculpture.
He did something like that.
He loved doing pieces of building, and that's why he always pushed me into being an architect.
I remember.
And what was your father's name?
Samuel.
And he worked all his career in San Francisco.
He arrived there in 1904 from Romania.
Really?
Directly from Romania?
From Romania, where his father was a wood powder.
The father was apprenticed to him.
So when he arrived in San Francisco, he was a 19-year-old, and then a journeyman would play.
And he became the major carver in San Francisco.
And if you're in San Francisco and have time to go to Grace Cathedral on Mount Phil, on each side of the choir,
enormous organ screens, they're called.
It's all the oak tracery that contains all the organ pipes.
I can show you photographs when you don't show me.
That's kind of a good job.
So if you get into the Bohemian flood, all of these... Really.
So from the very beginning, I gather, you had this
Oh, there's a predilection to be in some aspect of design, I guess.
Absolutely.
Well, as I say, as long as I can remember, he had me either sitting on the bench watching him carve, and then later I could mark the wood for this.
It ended up with a pretty good-sized shot, but then he could do 12 carvings.
So all the stencil markings, I and my sisters got to do it.
keep ahead of the time.
But he always said, don't be a carbon, be the architect.
He decides where the carbon is going to go.
That was important.
He taught me to draw more than he taught, even though I did some time.
You make the sisters so you... Three older sisters.
And one friend yourself?
He wouldn't give up.
This was very important to that culture.
You weren't a
You didn't prove you were a man until you had a son.
There was actually another daughter who died when she was one-year-old.
So he went through four girlism, wouldn't you?
Did he meet his wife in California?
Oh, that was another coincidence.
She, too, came from Romania in the same year, but separately.
They didn't know each other until they met in France this time.
And became engaged.
were separated during the 1960 earthquake for three days.
So they found each other in the tent city of Golden Gate Park at the island.
But both their houses had been destroyed.
That's how they met?
No, no.
They were already engaged.
Oh, I think so.
And they finally found each other and got married right away.
Was San Francisco a place where Romanians came?
Generally, ethnic groups kind of go to the same places.
There was quite a large group that came.
I'm not sure who started it, but once, as you say, a group gets started, they keep coming.
And is Briga the family name?
I think it got modified way back.
To avoid conscription.
There were lots of reasons for changing names.
Let's talk about the development of a passion.
Well, I guess you could say our first collection was when we furnished our apartment in Cambridge.
Really?
with all the, I'd say, museum pieces of the international style.
The Nelson desk, and the Eames chairs, and the Sarah, and then Scherz-Long, and the Calder Mobile.
Which you're pointing to.
Right.
Thank you.
And the Brock section over the fireplace.
Just all these choice pieces
and all the exhibits of modern furniture at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
Those were all the things that we assembled to live.
This is about when, by the way?
We both arrived at Harvard Graduate School of Design in August 41.
And you know what happened in December 41.
And so I did not get to finish my year's master's.
See, I already had a master's from Eugene Berkeley in architecture.
So I had one year's for a master's.
Instead of an MA, it's called an M-Arch degree.
But I completed only half of it.
I guess it was the federal government came to all the architecture and engineering schools, recruiting people to pass back on, to come to MIT, four months course, six days a week, eight hours a day, ended up with a certificate at Naval Architect.
And I worked the rest of the time that Helen completed her, you might say, undergraduate graduate degree within three years.
I worked at the Boston Navy.
I didn't know what that was.
At the end of which I got drafted into the Navy.
But then the war was over a year later.
And we came back to that.
Is that your career as architect?
As architect?
Both working in San Francisco?
Both.
Well, San Francisco or Oakland.
But based in the Bay Area.
But they are.
And we lived in Berkeley.
that ended up for 31 years before we moved here, I think, for the sake of 15 years ago, I think.
15 years ago, mainly because Berkeley became, I don't know what the right word is, infested or came down with cancer and no longer was the Berkeley we chose to live in.
It became the People's Republic of Berkeley, you've heard this,
reference to it.
I don't know if you ever knew Berkeley in its earlier times, but it was in the late 40s.
Well, it was like a Cambridge of the West, right?
Exactly.
It was.
It was the best place to go on with.
So, that's why we decided it's never going to recover, so we have to go on.
Are you looking also for a place to bring the large collection?
No.
As a matter of fact, it's a disadvantage for scholars that the collection is here.
Because this is an awkward distance from the Bay Area.
You know, two and a half hours drive is a... And if you're going to do a one-day visit, you've got five hours of driving for maybe
Three or four hours at the most, which is not good for a scholar who can't afford to rent a motel and all the rest of it.
But some do.
Quite beautiful though, it's an agreeable drive.
It's marvelous.
But when we lived in Berkeley, it was just routine.
There was always somebody there speaking through some aspect or other.
What was it your intent?
to assemble a collection.
That would be so important that scholars would have to consult it.
If they wanted to write about William Morris, they would have to consult their collection.
I've got to let you read the preface for the catalog of the exhibit that UC Berkeley put on.
the books at the Bangkok Library and all the decorative art at the UC Museum.
Contact.
And the catalog is published.
All of them.
Really?
And who published the catalog?
UC Bank.
And I might be able to get a copy of it.
Those things disappeared.
They kept horrific to get a hold of it.
The best I could offer to do, I can do a Xerox of this process.
That would be great.
Because it explained that no way was there ever an intentional form in a collection.
The only reason I'm hesitating, you could learn a heck of a lot more quicker if you read it.
Well, I'll certainly get it.
I'm still looking for reflections.
The way we got started in New York, that's what I was going to say.
The only thing we started collecting was all the international style furniture, because that's the way we were designing.
The only fit environment.
But in 1960, we happened to be in New York, Museum of Modern Art,
put on an exhibit of their own collection of our new old furniture and objects.
So we went to the Museum of Modern Art the way we do whenever we're in New York.
Here's this exhibit.
Something about it grabs folks.
And we bought the tabloids.
And we came back.
said something like, well, maybe we could look around and see if we can find some piece of Arniveau as a sort of souvenir reminder of this great exhibit.
You know, Arniveau had never been important.
You touch on it when you study history of art and architecture.
Just the way you would touch on William Morris can go right on.
The way you would touch on the pre-racial arts.
Pass right over them.
There's nothing really important.
So that's what he had to do.
So here we came back and we did find a salt and pepper shaker.
And that was the beginning.
And for the next five years, it became serious.
Included in things like getting into furniture, like that corner cabinet and the pieces of gallet glass sitting on it.
And then there's Tiffany and all the rest of it.
Very serious collections.
This is 1960 to 1965.
Like we'd be in Boston with a dealer, mainly just an antique dealer, because there were no real specialists in the 90s.
Not many people were interested in that.
He said, well, he didn't have anything, but he knew that in Kennebunkport, there was a dealer who had a barn, and he had a load of barns.
So I rented a car in Boston.
Helen didn't want to bother driving up.
I drove up there alone and brought back that lamp that's sitting right next to you there, and the tallest of the gal, a whole bunch of people.
So that's how crazy it was done.
But by this time, you had been an architect for at least, I don't know, 20-odd years.
Sure.
And, of course, you didn't say serious collecting, and you mentioned Tiffany's.
Accumulated.
I mean, the means were such, now, that you could afford... We could do it.
But people have been throwing Tiffany's in our house.
Stickley's a fast move.
Even more so, what's become the current rate is the, I guess it's referred to as the Mission-style furniture, Stickley in New York, and then he moved to New Jersey, or even Albert Hubbard in East Aurora.
Well, that stuff was pure junk powder, and now that stuff is crazy.
Were you cognitive of fashion, or were you oblivious to it?
There was no fashion.
But what else?
But you were still collecting the pieces.
Oh, because they just felt good.
So you weren't really influenced by what was... There was no... There was still no interest.
When you go into an antique theater,
and asked to have him in Arneville because there was something exciting.
He said, oh, yeah, when I bought this house full of stuff, there were a couple of pieces.
You want to go in the back storeroom and look around, you might see it.
So that's where we did a lot of marvelous, very economical purchases.
And you knew, of course, that you were getting timeless things.
Well, by then we started to buy Arneville books, books about Arneville.
from the photograph to really recognize the various designers and some of the characteristics.
So we knew what we were looking for in finding, you know, like Ellen got hooked on inkwells.
I don't know how many of them are, but they must be 40 inkwells.
And now you go try to buy an inkwell, you can't find one.
You can pay for it.
It was an exciting treasure, truly treasure.
Pretty much, yes.
Any favorites among the pieces here?
That you inspired that period?
Do you like them when you like them?
They're like children, right?
This is a lamp I didn't see.
How would you describe that lamp?
Well, let's see.
I think it's referred to as etched glass.
It came from... See, there were two major glass designers in the town of Nancy in France, N-A-N-C-Y.
And Galet, G-A-L-L-L-E with the accent, he was the primary.
designer, and then Dome Brothers, C-N-U-M, or the other one.
And then later we went to Nancy, went to the Dome factory in the house, and then they'd taken over one of the marvelous Arniveau designs, huge residences, and it's not a museum.
Anyway, Arniveau is done.
Before I could get here, I don't mean to break up the train, but just tell me briefly what kind of wood that is.
This is Longwood.
And if you try to give a name to this style, I think it would be Tyrone.
Is that your favorite chair in the room?
Is that the chair you enjoy your father's chair?
It does.
A Baroque chair with carved heads, I guess?
Yeah, Cupid's.
And all you see is a three-piece set.
These two...
These two birds sit on either side.
That's why this is a... Oh, look at the birds.
It's funny.
Your dad did those too.
It's a three-piece set.
They'd be on either side.
And they're meant to be seats as well.
I see.
What kind of birds are they, would you say?
Eagles?
Yeah.
See, and they're the same matching Cupid head.
on those as well.
See, so the arc of this and this is really a handsome assembly.
We've had them rearranged.
They were an anniversary present for my mother one day.
Pretty nice.
That's a very touching present.
And as I say, it was unusual to have furniture, the only furniture that they have.
But he just, well, didn't get around to doing furniture because he was always just a piece of the building.
Yeah, it was.
So we're looking now to try and understand
how you made this, you were a serious collector.
That's the first time we realized that we had this problem.
Problem.
Addiction.
And you were addicted equally, by the way.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
Then the
dealer in Paris who specialized in both Oriental Art and outside of him.
I was his major and his minor was Art Nouveau.
And he showed us at his own apartment, Art Nouveau designed books that we had never seen.
So when we came back from that trip, pursuing Art Nouveau's books is where, by accident,
came across a facsimile of a William Morris printed book, The Gorge of Chaucet.
That's right.
And that had been, it was sort of a three-quarter, but very faithful, well done facsimile.
And I bought that
and read just quite an extensive introduction that the publisher had put into this facsimile.
Facsimile introduction all about Morris's activities.
So then the next thing was, well, let's maybe get a real Tom Scott Press book.
And I went to what was then John Howell's books.
Warren Howell was the son of John Howell who was deceased.
But Warren Howell had become the major bookier in San Francisco.
And I went in and this young fellow who I learned later had just started to work with.
And I asked, did they have any Telstra Pressbooks?
It just happened to them.
He opened this door to this bookshelf, and they had just taken in on consignment.
I think it was 51 or 53 of the 66 volumes.
At one lock.
They were all away.
Were they in a vault?
No, they were just there in the bookshelf.
It was behind the door that looked like a door to a room.
So, that meant I came by three successive extended lunch hours and looked at every single night and finally picked up this marvelous example
There was no Kelmscott Chaucer there.
But I picked out The Life and Death of Jason, which was one of the large corridors, or small folio, inscribed to Berne Jones from W.M.
It had Berne Jones' Kelmscott Crest bookplate, basically.
That's a pretty main story.
So it was mint.
I'll show you.
Still is.
So fine, you know.
This that's the Morris collection.
No, this was just buying one Tom Scott's best book.
Because if you were buying Morris, you'd have bought the whole, you'd have bought the 53 boxes.
That came three weeks later.
That was the start of the collection.
No, this was just intended to have one example of it.
So those three weeks were sort of crawling up the wall.
What happened within the intervening three weeks is what I'd love to know.
What's happening to you at this time?
What do you think?
What's the reverse of withdrawal symptoms?
Acceleration.
Anticipation symptoms that I finally
It was overwhelming when you went back and bought it.
Well, something's happened in here, though, because you've been an art collector, you've been a furniture collector, items, artifacts.
Yeah, but this wasn't Art Nouveau, really.
Oh, really?
And it's a book.
And it was a book.
Although we were, I should explain, during the Art Nouveau period, the 60 to 65, did get involved with Beard Slew,
and the yellow book, which was also because of Beardsley.
And let's say an extensive library about Arneville, all the books that existed at that time.
So it was a pretty impressive couple of bookcases for both about and also good examples of books.
I had never considered it a book collection.
It was just a collection of objects.
So what happens when you bring that first book home?
And then it's three weeks, you say, of accelerating whatever the emotion is.
What are you thinking?
What's happening?
How is it that Morris infected you so thoroughly?
I'm wondering if you've got to intellectualize this at all.
What happened in those three weeks?
I know part of it was the incredible similarity to my father's drawing.
He could draw very much like the Count Scott Borders.
My father would decorate my sister's and my book covers.
You know, when you go to school, and they issue textbooks, and they tell you to put butcher papers and covers on them.
And then my father would enjoy decorating those colors.
I wish I had had one of those, but I don't.
You know, book covers get torn and wasted.
That flashed back in your mind, though.
You probably hadn't even thought of that for 30 years.
But it looked so much like my father's job.
Something happened.
Yeah, but when you see the window, Marla's stuck.
You never forget it.
Yeah.
You think that was it?
That was part of it.
Yeah.
But the other thing, there was something about having handled that many Telmstam Press books in that short a period that there's some kind of transference of realization that these are jewels.
These are important.
These are like handling a marble
figurine or something.
And I chose to remember that, because you're giving me children by sharing it.
So finally it was uncontainable.
I went and brought home these cardboard boxes.
Did you discuss this with your wife?
Sure, she had to write the check.
At the same time,
kind of thing happen, you say, oh, there's been lots of, what I understand, I didn't invent this, the book collector who sneaks home with the book under his coat and gets into the library and gets it on the shelf so that she doesn't see him bring it in.
You know, there's been a lot of those.
But when it's this major, you can't sneak in.
I think it was three cardboard boxes.
Or when we did buy the Morris Archives of the Decorating Press.
This came later.
That came a few years later.
About three or four years later.
She had to be in a match.
That was the most single major.
So they were 43 of what, 60s?
No, it was 50-some or 60-some books.
And then Warren Howell picked up one at a time in the remainder until we had them all.
You got the Chaucer from Hawaii?
Oh, well, here.
First he got a Chaucer bound in the gray boys, just gray cardboard with a linen spine.
See, they printed 425 paper copies, and all but 46 of them were bound in this form, which is basically intended to be a protective binding until you take it to your own binder and have your own binder put on.
But Morris did have 46 of those paper copies bound
in this white pigskin binding that Morris himself designed.
He did design a couple of minor bindings, but this one was a real major one.
Did they call it vellum?
No.
No, it's white pigskin.
I thought it was vellum.
No.
The way that Kelmscott Press books were issued was either in these gray boards or
in Vella, just a flat plain sheet of Vella, undecorated.
But the Chaucer was not.
The Chaucer was not issued in Vella.
It was either the boards or these 46 copies.
So anyway, Howell first got a copy of the Chaucer in boards.
It was sort of beat up, but okay.
This would do with the understanding that when a better boards copy came along, or if possible,
We would trade it in.
Warren would take it back.
So then Warren knew of this American living in Montevideo, Uruguay, who, I guess, getting old and decided to sell his libraries.
Warren went down there, flew down there, and bought a number of things, but he carried in his hand this copy that we had.
You look like you're ready for lunch.
You went out and investigated.
You researched a lot of the things.
This possession wasn't enough for you, I gather.
You had to know.
You had to know what you're looking at.
That's what you were collecting, by the way.
I think it's unavoidable.
See, my dad did those two bags.
Oh, that's been wonderful.
And he did this right away.
Take a look on this one.
As you see, he does a drunken Bacchus.
Oh, boy.
I'm just going to write that down.
Yeah.
Drunken Bacchus.
He's designed to fit on the end of an elliptical wine barrel.
You probably had to get these from other people who own them.
No, no.
These are things he still had in the shop.
See, this piece was carved for William Randolph Hearst's place up near Mount Shasta.
He had San Simeon and he had Wyn Toon.
Wyn.
W-Y-N-T-O-O-N.
What would you call this?
This is like a Bavarian Gothic braille, handrail.
Julia Morgan was the architect, and by the time this had been carved, she had redesigned the bountaine, so this piece was abandoned.
Ah, it was in the shop.
It was in the shop, then we had it in our house in Berkeley, and then we moved it.
Okay.
This is piece number one of the Art Nouveau collection.
This is the way it started.
Two salt and pepper shakers, right?
Yeah.
And what is the material?
Is it silver?
Yeah, it's sterling.
It needs to be polished.
But then you get things like this fantastic, which is the structure is a piece of crystal.
Oh, wow.
These straps hold the top and bottom together.
And her hair was originally gramey.
It was gold.
But her hair makes, that's what it looks like.
It holds up the candle.
Look at the hair.
The reason we have it, I made the drawing.
Oh, really sorry.
We got to know an Italian man who grew up in his house as a kid when he wanted to restore it in his home area.
He had to, as you always do, had to submit his proposal to the local restaurante.
The restaurante?
I'm sorry.
So he needed a drawing, and so when we were staying with him at his villa outside of Buchanan, I would sit and draw this, and he would describe the changes he was planning, and I would incorporate that.
So then they finally executed the place, and there's a restaurant in the lower floor, and they had the drawing made into the place.
I have the Book of Minutes.
from the company in which on the very first page it says the names of the designers will be withheld from the public in other words you're hiring morrison company so to answer your question though the figure was designed by sir edward jones okay now
That's a 50, that's a straight 50, which is not a Y, it's a regular one, yeah.
You're looking at it, this end lady here, see?
So there are five figures standing on top of five more, and then there's the rose.
Now we have the entire window.
And where was the window?
from a unitarian church in haywood near manchester england you went to england and acquired this from a dealer who had bought it at auction of properties see the building had to be condensed so the windows were removed but the thing that's intriguing
The dealer, or let's say some of these, had each of these 10 figures as a separate lot.
And then the top, I think, was a separate lot.
So this dealer had to bid on each of these 11 separate lots in order to keep the window in crack, and he managed to do it.
So that's the first case.
But then he had them in his shop for almost two years.
See, these are separate panels, and they were just stacked in the back storeroom again.
Wow.
He hadn't figured out a way.
I'd made these trains myself.
He hadn't come up with a system for displaying them.
So that's why he had just sort of let them sit there.
So I came to the shop.
because somebody told me they had some Morris ceramic.
And you discovered these.
The woman, when she was riding up the sail swift for the tiles, said, oh, by the way, would you be interested?
Did you break into a cold sweat when these things happen?
So what happened was, she had the 8x10 photos that had been used in the Sotheby's catalog.
And this was a morning when I was going to meet Helen for lunch.
So I said, yeah, you know, after I pulled a couple of panels off.
I said, can I take the photo with me to show it to my wife?
Which I took it, bought her a drink, took the photo out of the envelope and said, I bought it.
And she said, that's nice, thinking I had bought the photo.
Oh, I bought the rooms.
You know, this is 11 feet by 18 feet.
How about all these parts up here?
Did you get those two?
See, this is at Stanford in 1975, and they put on an exhibit, so they built a frame working from the suddenly photograph.
At least that frame, that would be kind of nice to have.
They broke it down.
Where are you going to put it?
In a church, I guess.
Couldn't find a church to buy.
But they had this marvelous art gallery with the big sky to be lighted from behind.
I couldn't find a church to buy.
You added to buy.
It wouldn't be in the goodness of your heart to donate it to a church.
Get out of your mind.
Then we couldn't live with it.
Now this has been one of the best things about it is living this year.
And what's really fantastic is we raised three boys with all this stuff.
And in all their lives,
Only one piece ever got dumped in it.
I can't believe it.
What was that piece?
I don't know.
I ask every question, don't I?
Hey, these dragonflies here.
I'll show you what got there.
I did save all the pieces.
You saved all the pieces?
No, I say I did not save all the pieces.
They were just smithereens.
Well, it wasn't a Morris piece, anyway, was it?
No, it was a galet piece, though.
That's pretty good.
Yeah, and that's very... Here we go.
See the dragonflies?
It was one of those etched glass balls on it.
And it got knocked over just first.
What happens when, well, how do you feel when that happens?
When it happened, it's his.
Thankfully, it's only a year.
I can't remember how long we had him up in the thumb hangers.
Oh, yes, it's identical.
What we're looking at is what?
That's a bee.
A little lamp.
But I mean, this particular thing that you're holding.
These are dragonflies.
Dragonflies, okay.
Well, hey, one.
By having each one of them, when they got to be about 16 or so, come work in my office for the summer.
That was a mistake?
I turned them off.
They saw all the dog work involved.
But you don't wear a beret and a snot.
Raise your phone.
He had to do something about the state of printing.
Morris had lived many years of his life.
Go ahead.
And when he finally did get around to designing the books, he had this enormous background as a designer of fabrics, tapestries, stained glass windows, all of these things.
So as he said, he couldn't help
but lavish his skills on the printed page.
And he was able to do it like nobody ever did before or since because of this whole lifetime of genius designing.
See, his true genius was two-dimensional design.
He barely ever designed
anything three-dimensional, a piece of furniture, even though he started out wanting to be an architect.
But his true genius came out as a two-dimensional designer better than anybody before or since, in the form of the glass, the tapestries, the woven and printed fabrics and the wallpapers.
But he was so disturbed
when they would have an exhibit of good printing, well printed books, that none of his own writings ever appeared in one of these exhibits.
So first he decided he'll try to work with the best printer at that time in terms of doing some type of graphic design with them.
Because, you see, for relaxation, he had been doing illuminated manuscripts for over 20 years before he started the film's podcast.
That's amazing.
So, he already had very, let's say, a deep knowledge of good typographic design because of his study.
Well, it's pretty, it goes straight all the way down.
Because of his study of manuscripts and
See, like his third library was assembled as source material for good typography in the form of manuscripts and the impunables in the early printed books.
And the majority of that library is now at the Morgan Library in New York.
We have, I think, six of the books.
You have six?
Six that were in his library at the time he died.
That's pretty impressive.
Yeah, I'm impressed.
Impressive?
I'm delighted.
I'm paying attention.
I want you to know he can get six of Loras' own books long.
I'm delighted.
With his Kelmscott Press book played in it.
Wow.
That's amazing.
This is beautiful.
Isn't this?
It's splendid.
Now we can turn off the tape.
now that kelp's kelp which is rooted in the bottom and it stands up like a forest and every year this specially designed ship comes and harvests it has a great it looks like an old rear paddle wheel but it's actually scooping it into an endless belt that hauls it into the into the smells too doesn't it we love that and what do they do with it medicinal and i think
The Orientals have some food use for it.
So they actually are harvesting.
Oh, harvesting for commercial crops.
They're not trying to remove it.
They're harvesting.
No, no.
As a matter of fact, it causes more growth.
See, now, if you look up here, look to your right.
There you see Tor House and Hawk Tower.
Wow.
Yeah, I know.
Can you look at that?
I will take a picture of it, too.
And I will, by the way, will not mention that you're adjacent to that because I might as well give them your address.
Yeah.
We're looking at some sketches that Mr. Burger did, and these are travel sketches, and I said, you are an artist, and I said, but I think it energizes the collecting spirit in your case, and your answer was... I realize how hard it is to do what Morris has done, because I've tried it.
And you mentioned your father, too, again.
My father started me drawing as early as I can remember.
Well, if you're real good children, I'll give you copies of those.
I'd rather never put them on the wall.
Here's Helen, before and after.
We were visiting in Vicenza, a woman who was a counter, who outgrew all her Dior's and Chanel, so they were playing dress-up, and Helen's got this great Dior thing with the...
with the coronet on.
So I got it, took them out and about me, and that's in the arrangement from the slide.
That's nice.
Isn't that it?
That's where you designed the picture for the restaurants.
Yes.
Vicenza, I think.
Vicenza.
No, that's very cool.
Oh, it's carpet.
I feel the quality of that.
Yeah, would you hit the switch?
Good.
This is a full-size, you're familiar with the Easter word cartoon, of course, by Morris himself, whereas this, and I should have pointed out the two in the dining room, on either side of those windows,
the cartoons by Glenn Jones.
This is using Mrs. Morris as the model.
What are the initials?
Figure portfolios.
They had a numbering system of filings.
And they also had SP for subject portfolio.
That was for groups of figures.
And LP was the third, the large portfolio.
And Morris did this one himself.
That is Morris' own time.
Wow.
That's Bern-Jones.
And these are all Bern-Jones studies for various things.
Four, five, six Bern-Jones.
Oh, there's one here.
It's kind of in this wall.
Oh, yeah.
Yes, just look.
He's talking about economy of line.
Look what he achieved.
Yeah.
And he didn't start drawing until he was out of college.
He was just there.
Out of college.
Look at these studies.
They're a figure for a campus, too.
Look at the difference.
And position.
Is there an adequate biography in your view of William Morris?
Is there an adequate biography?
Yeah.
There's so many.
What's your favorite?
Do you have a favorite?
I like Henderson's.
1967, I think it came out.
I'll bet you could write a life, write something.
I'm not a writer.
These are all reproductions.
that I have hanging up.
They're pretty, you know, in groups.
They're beautiful, though.
But it's fun to see things like this, where the same design, a light background and a dark background, how different elements become the dominant.
It's the exact same design.
Here you're aware of these things.
Here you're aware of the surface.
What kinds of flowers are you filming?
Definitely.
And this is fun when it's all
Now, these three drawings here are by Morris, and I refer to these as Greatly Studies.
And these are the concept stage for a design.
These happen to be for stained glass window figures.
This is a photograph of a full-size final cartoon here.
You can see by the fact that every last little fold ends up in the final design.
It's a good evidence that these were in large photography, which Morris's neighbor had the big photo of the great business.
And Morris used photography in all his work.
And you had these slug drapery studies at St.
Cyprian.
C-Y-P-R-I-A-N-E-R-A-N-E-R-A-N-E-R-A-N-E-R-A-N-E-R-A-N-E-R-A-N-E-R-A-N-E-R-A-N-E-R-A-N-E-R-A-N-E-R-A-N-E-R-A-N-E-R-A-N-E-R-A-N-E-R-A-N-E-R-A-N-E-R-A-N-E-R-A
And he wouldn't bother going into the detail of the head or sometimes the hands until you get to the full slides or the detail of his palms.
You do this grouping though?
No, at one of the exhibits.
That's one of the nice things about loading things for exhibits.
It comes back modern.
That's right.
And grouped rather nicely, too.
Well, I decided on the group.
But we have 140 of the Morris figure Jones that were part of the art track.
Whereas, I think the Victoria and Albert has the next most, and they have seven.
The next most?
Did you get that?
He has more than the Victoria and Albert.
See, the thing that is special about our adventure, we have depth in every single one of Morris' activities, whereas you can go to a whole bunch of institutions that could have more than any one of them, but I don't know of any place that'll save you a lot of travel.
And that gets involved with the question of, where do I look forward to this collection ending up?
That's a question I assure you.
Namely, because of Morris' wide range of activities, it is that buzzword, interdisciplinary.
And I hope it can be placed in a suitable situation, probably in an institution,
that will keep it all in one place so that you can look at the drawing and go see it in the illuminated page or in the window or on the drawing of the tapestry and not divide the drawings over to the art department and all the socialist pamphlets over to the history department and so on.
It's got to be kept
available in one place, like it is right here.
But I think you would probably insist upon that, wouldn't you?
You know, you can insist.
Here's the other thing.
Because we can't just give the whole thing away, it's going to have to be a donation slant purchase agreement.
So that involves negotiating.
So I'll try my best to make sure it comes out that way.
Here's Captain Ahoy.
He whispers lots.
Well, the thing of it is, there's nothing here that's mediocre.
Everything is of museum quality.
He did everything class.
Anything.
Everything and anything.
This house is filled with treasures.
Yes.
Part of the yarn invoking it is this important collection of mine.
All of Eiffel's drawings and big books.
His actual Eiffel's drawings?
Well, no, prints of them.
Prints of his actual drawings.
My little son was very good at motocross.
There's another before.
Yeah, I thought that was pretty nice.
Now here's part of the upper rows of the window.
The upper rows of the stained glass window.
Remember there are ten figures of him and the rows above.
Look upstairs, looking out on the, you know, Jeffers' face.
This is the upper part of that.
See, upstairs you saw five figures, and you'll see the other five here, and in these two rooms, the voice.
This is Helen's computer.
Where she does that.
Finance is in the pack.
Oh, he writes the letters.
This is one of their paintings.
That should have been pointing out their paintings.
Yes.
These are moments.
Actual Morris.
Reproduction of Morris.
Very accurate.
Yeah, it's a Morris chair.
You see the movable bar that tilts the bar is what's characterized as a Morris chair.
William Morris.
You have a Morris chair.
That's why you have a Morris chair.
I never knew.
He didn't design it.
But his company used to like to give names to various chairs of Lange, and this was really a traditional chair, and when they started manufacturing their own version of it, they labeled it Morris chair.
It's stuck ever since, and everybody makes their own interpretation.
uh you are entering the first part of the scenic road press formerly the tunnel road press what he's telling you is that he's also this is this is your i can see why sid sid looks at you as a mentor we do a lot of similar things so these are all
things I've set.
The screw?
My father did that, but it was done for a wine tasting room.
You know, the wood screws for a wine present.
So we're looking here at least 50, maybe 100 type papers.
Mustard.
Sandy, when did you start this after the Boris?
Oh, yeah.
So Morris inspired you to go and become Well, first he inspired me to do good calligraphy.
I'm a very good calligrapher.
Okay.
And then because you print it, I had to print.
What room do we call this?
This is the Scenic Rose Press.
What is your imprint, your cauliflower?
Oh, yeah.
I just say Scenic Rose Press.
Oh, now this is earlier.
Two hundred copies of a letter from the collection of San Bernardino.
They're printed at the Tunnel Road Press.
The Tunnel Road Press.
Here it is, printed at the scenic road press.
We live on Tunnel Road.
Look at the quality it was printed.
Here's my magnum opus.
This was great.
The Stanford Library Associates came to visit Tor House, and this I called Comscott Carmel, where you are standing.
And there's a keepsake for their visit to both places.
I borrowed from Jeffer's son his mother's travel diary about when the family visited May Morris at Kelmscott Manor in 1929.
This is the picture of the old house by the Thames to which the people of this story went.
Thereafter follows the book itself, which is called News From Nowhere, or an Epic of West, as written by William Morris.
See, this is the frontispiece from the Comstock Press edition of News From Nowhere.
That was a socialist novel.
Beautiful.
If you read nothing else of Morris, read that.
But here's the only time I've used the bloomers.
Those are blooming initials, referred to as bloomers.
And this type is Troy type.
Bloomers, which is short for?
Blooming initials.